[THEME MUSIC]
>>JIMMY CHURCH: Hey,
everyone, I'm Jimmy Church.
You've probably seen me right
here on Into The Vortex on Gaia.
And I'm honored to be sitting in
for George Noory on this episode
of Beyond Belief.
Joining us is award-winning
filmmaker and journalist,
Brian Cory Dobbs.
He is here to tell us
that not only was there
life on Mars thousands
of years ago,
but there is still
life on Mars today.
Welcome, Brian.
>>BRIAN DOBBS: Thank you
Jimmy, it's great to be here.
>>CHURCH: Let's start
with the big stuff.
It's the face on Mars.
And I remember the newspapers
and the coverage on it,
we were all fascinated with it.
That's where it started for me.
Did it start that way with you?
>>DOBBS: It did, and
that's a common story.
I remember being in
college 20 years ago
and found this face
on Mars picture
on some internet
message board one time,
and it looked haunting for sure.
And then people just
explain it away and then
that's that and you don't really
hear about Mars other than that.
>>CHURCH: Where were you
with it today, the face?
>>DOBBS: With the
face, jeez, the face
is the most controversial
aspect of Mars,
aside from the question
of life itself.
What most people don't
know about the face
and about the structure
that just so happens
to look like a face, is that
there is quantitative analysis
done by Dr. Mark Carlotto that
indicates this feature has
an inherent sense of geometry,
repeated expressions of 3,
4, or 5 triangles and symmetry.
And when run through
computer software,
fractal analysis
indicates that it
is distinctly different than
the surrounding landscape.
So quantitatively speaking,
it's a unique feature.
>>CHURCH: Do you think the face
was done for us to observe,
or do you think it was more
of a monument or a temple?
>>DOBBS: Who's to say?
I mean, once we start trying
to attribute significance
beyond just how unusual it
looks like from a mathematical
standpoint, that's where you
start getting into too much
speculative territory.
What is interesting,
though, is that it's
in a region on Mars
that just so happens
to be near other unusual
formations on there.
And I guess the question
is whether or not
it's actually intended to be
a face and beacon for those
who might be looking
at it from above.
It's awfully strange.
And why not go take
a closer look at it?
>>CHURCH: Well, what
are we doing here?
We have things all over
this planet that can only
be observed from above.
So why wouldn't an ancient
culture do the exact same thing?
That's our evidence.
It's evidence of one.
We do it, so why
wouldn't somebody else?
>>DOBBS: Well, and
that's the argument.
There's precedent
for that thing.
So people who want to claim that
the idea that it was created
for someone else to look at
from a different perspective,
for that to be nonsense,
well, I don't buy that.
And while the face
gets all the attention
for those people who are
uninitiated to the entire--
>>CHURCH: As it should.
>>DOBBS: It's a
compelling feature.
And it certainly made
NASA go, hey look,
there's something
strange here back in 1976
when they first imaged it.
>>CHURCH: Now with the evidence
as we look at Mars, photograph
Mars, image Mars, the
topography, the geography,
it appears that
water was everywhere.
But that's the was
and that's the past.
Is there evidence
of water today?
Is it still everywhere?
>>DOBBS: Yes, it is.
And most notably at
the polar ice cap,
that is in fact water ice.
We know this.
This is beyond just
evidence, this is proof.
We've proven that this is ice.
Now basically all
over the planet,
just centimeters beneath
the surface of the soil,
is frozen water,
ice essentially.
So it's everywhere today.
>>CHURCH: Why keep the public
in the dark about this?
The public seems to be generally
unaware of a ginormous fact.
>>DOBBS: That's a
very good question.
What I would
attribute that to is
just the lackluster
public relations
that NASA has offered for
the past nearly half century.
The previous
versions of NASA were
really gung-ho about going out
and conquering space and just
making these discoveries and
talking about the significance
of their work with the public.
But lately the past few
decades, that really
hasn't been the case.
And it's just one
of the common themes
with NASA is that they make
incredible discoveries, they do.
They're messaging on what
they've discovered, stinks.
>>CHURCH: When you look
at, again, the topography
and you look at the
imaging, you can see where
an ocean should have been.
Was Mars just a
water world like us?
And isn't water life?
>>DOBBS: I mean, look
at what NASA says.
In their search for
life, what do they say?
Follow the water.
So when we look at Mars
today, for those people who
have seen an image of the Earth
with all the water sucked out
of it, you see these
differences in elevations
and we see the same on Mars.
It just so happens to
be a lot of the land is
on one side of the planet, and a
lot of the lower elevation where
an ocean used to be.
So the topography
looks different,
but there is erosional
evidence of what
appeared to be former rivers,
lakes, and of course, an ocean.
So it really all
points to this notion
that Mars used to look a
lot like Earth does today.
>>CHURCH: And we can see that?
We can see it.
What else could create
that waterway or the path
of a river and that erosion?
What else could do
that besides water?
>>DOBBS: That's a
very good question.
It seems so obvious,
even to people
who aren't trained in
geology or water erosion.
And thank goodness for people
like Dr. John Brandenburg, who
back in 1986 was
the first to publish
this whole hypothesis
about there
being a previous ocean on Mars.
Now back then, the scientific
community more or less
rejected this idea, but
today it's widely accepted.
>>CHURCH: Now, if water is
life, and that's what NASA says,
that's what anthropologists
say, and we're out there looking
for life now, look
for water worlds,
water is life, that
would indicate there
must be microbial fossils.
There must be
microbial evidence.
But NASA denies this, why?
>>DOBBS: It's a whole
can of worms they just
don't want to address.
As we know here
on Earth, microbes
can essentially live
everywhere in the most extreme
environments.
Even in the middle of an ice
block of a piece of an ice--
And some microbes can actually
melt the surrounding ice,
creating a little sea for them
to swim around in and extract
nutrients.
So we have ice on Mars,
and the conditions
on the surface of Mars
aren't nearly as harsh
as some of the
conditions on Earth,
hydrothermal vents
inside nuclear waste.
On the outside of the
International Space Station,
we're finding microbes.
Certainly the surface of Mars
is more hospitable to microbes,
so why not?
Why is that such a bold claim
that the possibility of finding
microbes on the surface of
Mars within the ice that's
all over the planet, and you've
got the sun providing energy,
you've got some organic matter
there, some energy source,
so why is that so crazy?
I don't know.
>>CHURCH: You mentioned
Viking earlier.
The original announcements
from Viking were,
wow, we've got life on Mars.
And I always imagined the
experiments with the droppers
and how they were doing that,
and they came back with life
on Mars.
That's the opposite of
NASA's current statements.
Why?
>>DOBBS: The Devil's
in the details.
And this is one of the
public relations mishaps
that I just mentioned.
In 1976, we send this
really ambitious mission
to Mars, two probes, both
with a lander and an orbiter.
The landers go down, each lander
on opposite side of the planet
was equipped with life
detection experiments.
These are biology experiments.
And one of them in particular,
known as the Labeled Release
experiment designed by
the late Dr. Gil Levin.
It simply worked like this.
You'd scoop up some soil,
feed it some nutrients,
and see if any gas came down.
This was tested over
4,000 times here on Earth.
Never produced a false
positive nor false negative.
Now I don't know about
you, but in my book
that's a perfect test.
>>CHURCH: That's pretty solid.
>>DOBBS: And NASA wants to send
stuff out into space that they
know is going to work.
So they send it to Mars.
And it did exactly
what was intended,
to find soil that feed nutrients
to it and produce some gas.
Now the question was,
well, why didn't they
just pop the champagne and
say, we found life on Mars?
The problem was there
was another test,
a non-biological
test that was just
testing for organic
matter in the soil,
and they didn't find it.
Now we find out
later that the reason
why they didn't find
the organic matter
is because the experiment wasn't
sensitive enough back in 1976.
And what makes it even worse
is that they knew that.
Because they sent
this particular test,
the gas chromatograph
mass spectrometer,
to Antarctica to
test it there to see
if it found any organic matter
in the soil of Antarctica.
And it didn't find any, but they
still sent it to Mars anyway.
And they let that
override the test results
came back from the Labeled
Release experiment.
Fast-forward decades
later, we start
sending these cute little
rovers, which do fantastic work,
take fantastic images.
They found the missing
organic matter.
So why haven't we
revisited this question,
NASA, nearly 50 years later?
>>CHURCH: It seems to me,
and I could be way off here,
but finding any
indication of life on Mars
would increase the
funding environment.
That suddenly things
would go their way.
Why wouldn't they pursue it?
>>DOBBS: Well, we have
precedent for that too.
I mean, if we fast-forward a
little bit to the Allan Hills
meteorite story of
1996, where Bill Clinton
talked about this in the
White House lawn, that
directly funded NASA even more.
They started new astrobiology
research departments
in the wake of that
whole discovery.
Now, that was the second public
relations mishap for them
because there's been
a lot of controversy.
Is it or is it not life
embedded in this one
particular meteorite?
And then all of a sudden
it became, oh, well, we
don't want to touch
that because we're not
even sure we might have made
a claim that isn't true.
They simply don't want
to make another mistake.
So what they do instead
is just publish the data.
They don't really offer
any commentary on that.
They will leave that
to other people,
the independent
researchers essentially.
>>CHURCH: Right now
with the James Webb
Space Telescope in
looking at exoplanets
and the ability to
peer into an atmosphere
is pretty amazing to do
that light years away,
but are looking for certain
things that can only
be produced by microbial life.
And we've had some pretty
exciting announcements of late.
What can be produced
by microbial life?
>>DOBBS: Well, James
Webb Telescope,
that's a great
example here of what--
NASA does amazing
feats of engineering.
We stick this fancy telescope,
the successor to the Hubble
Telescope, out in
outer space, and it
looks at these exoplanets
many light years away.
And they're looking
at the habitability
of these atmospheres of
these Earth-like planets.
And they say, we
see biosignatures
in their atmosphere.
Now, what are they looking for?
They're looking for this one
particular organic substance.
And it's a mouthful, it's
known as dimethyl sulfide.
That's what leads
these news stories,
scientists think they
found life on exoplanets.
They're looking for this one
particular organic substance
known as dimethyl sulfide.
Now what I find even
more interesting
or where I think that people are
missing the obvious point here
is that where else do we
find dimethyl sulfide?
Which by the way to answer
your question, what produces
dimethyl sulfide is microbes.
The only way you can
produce dimethyl sulfide
is through active
microbial activity.
NASA knows this.
They even have this
on their website.
We find dimethyl
sulfide on Mars.
What discovered dimethyl
sulfide on Mars?
Was the Curiosity rover.
When it found the
organic matter,
it found the dimethyl
sulfide on Mars.
So why are we not taking
a closer look at this?
>>CHURCH: It doesn't
make any sense, does it?
>>DOBBS: No.
>>CHURCH: When we have huge
press releases coming out
from the James Webb
Space Telescope,
life on another planet,
alien life discovered.
Here we go, we've
got a water world.
The only thing that can produce
this out of water on Earth
is this, and now we have it.
If the same thing is
happening with the planet that
is next to us, that should
be the biggest news ever.
And that is the question, why?
Why stop it?
>>DOBBS: I've
interviewed a gentleman
by the name of
Dr. Steven Benner,
an award-winning
biochemist who has a lot
to say on the direction of
the overall astrobiology
community, who's got
a focus on exoplanets,
or maybe the moons of
Saturn and Jupiter.
And Dr. Benner says it's
ridiculous to put our efforts
into these places that we're not
going to get to in our lifetime.
Mars is right next door.
It's got all this evidence
for microbial life,
and we can get there.
We can get there next decade.
So why are we not going there?
There's this stigma
attached to Mars.
There's a lot of baggage
associated with Mars.
We've had 50 years of false
starts from the public's
perspective that those in
charge of the administration
simply don't want to
step in something that's
going to tarnish their career.
>>CHURCH: It's got chlorophyll.
Biology 101 your freshman
year in high school,
the first thing you're
taught that first week
is chlorophyll, its
definition, and how important
it is on planet Earth,
and how easy it is to see.
Mars has chlorophyll.
>>DOBBS: These are
NASA scientists
making these discoveries.
They just don't like
to talk about it.
But Dr. Carol Stoker, who is
still employed at NASA today,
she through the use
of spectroscopy,
and for those who don't
know that's when you shine
a laser at something and see
what wavelengths come back
and it indicates what
material it's made out of,
and this is a common way of
trying to figure out what
stuff's made out of, it's
well-accepted in the scientific
community, through the
use of spectroscopy, yes,
discovered something that
looks like chlorophyll.
Now, she was only allowed to
publish an abstract on this, not
a full research paper.
Why?
Why are we not
following up on that?
This is a NASA scientist.
>>CHURCH: What is rock varnish?
>>DOBBS: That's
a great question.
Here on Earth in the deserts,
certain types of rocks
have this black, shiny coating,
a varnish-looking coating.
You might call it rock
varnish or desert varnish.
And this shiny
black coating that
was created over
centuries of time
was created by a
microbial process.
Them interacting with
manganese, maybe digesting it,
producing this thin film
that hardens over the rock.
And we see this in the desert.
And thanks to the rovers
that NASA has sent to Mars
and has taken many
photographs of Mars,
we see this in the photos that
depict rock varnish on Mars.
So when the claim is
made there's absolutely
no evidence of life on Mars,
that's simply not true.
But let's take a look
at the word evidence.
When I use the word
evidence, I use it
in the strictest legal sense.
Evidence does not mean
the same thing as proof.
Evidence means suggestive of
proof, means conclusive of.
People conflate the terms.
So when people say
there's no evidence,
I'm like, that's not true.
And in my messaging I
don't say that there
is proof of life on Mars.
I'm saying there is
strong evidence that
needs to be followed up
on by biology experiments.
And the fact that we haven't
sent a biology experiment
to Mars in almost 50
years, what's that about?
>>CHURCH: Doesn't
make any sense.
I don't understand why
we don't send rovers
to where the issues are.
Why aren't we sending rovers in
the middle of a pile of snow?
I'm just saying, that seems
like the right thing to do.
Why haven't we gone back
to the face on Mars?
Why haven't we gone to the
shorelines of these oceans
and look for fossils?
I want to see a seashell.
Well, go to where they may be.
But for some reason,
we just don't do that.
>>DOBBS: NASA will actually
address this partially.
They'll say, we don't want to
go to these, quote-unquote,
"special regions" where
they think there's a higher
probability of finding life
because they don't want
to contaminate those locations.
Seems noble, but if
their whole mission
is to search for life,
not whole mission,
but a large portion of their
mission is to search for life,
then they're not
doing a good job of it
because they're avoiding it.
They haven't sent
biology experiments.
They're only sending rovers
that are equipped with geology
and atmospheric experiments.
They're not looking
directly for life.
What they say they're
doing is looking
for signs of ancient life.
Arguably, they've already
taken photographs of that,
and we can talk
about that later.
But as to why they're not
looking for it directly,
it's just getting
absurd at this point.
>>CHURCH: I like the
helicopter, but we
didn't put a camera on it.
We have some images
of rock varnish.
Let's take a look at this and
tell us what we're looking at.
>>DOBBS: So here's my
friend Barry DiGregorio.
He's an astrobiologist,
and he's literally
written the book about
the whole Viking mission.
Pretty much it's a
biography on Gil Levin,
but he has pointed me in the
direction of rock varnish
on Earth.
So here you can see
what it looks like.
You can take something and
scrape off that black coating.
And that is what rock varnish
looks like here on Earth.
So when we take a look
at Mars, arguably we
see this coating on
these rocks on Mars.
Now Barry is not the only
one who's noticed this.
Scientists who are affiliated
with NASA, specifically
Nina Lanza at Los Alamos has
published papers on this.
And what they're
trying to do, Jimmy,
is find some mechanism that
creates rock varnish on Mars
without invoking life.
And to date, they cannot
find that mechanism.
It is a yet
undetermined mechanism
that is producing
rock varnish on Mars.
>>CHURCH: So what else
could cause rock varnish?
>>DOBBS: That's the question.
They can't come
up with anything.
>>CHURCH: What about
fossil evidence,
have they photographed
any of that?
>>DOBBS: Arguably, yes.
And one of the best
examples of this
was, and let's talk
about evidence again.
Photographs are evidence
submissible in a court of law.
So when a rover takes a
photograph of something that
looks funny and you take
a closer look at it,
maybe a paleontologist
might look at it
and say, hey you know what,
that looks like a fossil?
Well, as it turns
out there we do
in fact have a few photographs
sourced from NASA rover images
that do indicate something
that appears to be a fossil.
The most notable one
was taken in 2004,
the Opportunity Rover
took something that
appears to be a crinoid fossil.
>>CHURCH: We have an image here.
Tell us what we're looking at?
>>DOBBS: So you
can see a crinoid.
It's a sea creature.
It's an animal.
And on the left you'll see
a fossil version of that--
>>CHURCH: From Earth?
>>DOBBS: Yes, this is on Earth.
And it's known as
a stalked crinoid.
And it has a little trunk that
tethers itself or roots itself
in the seabed.
But this is an animal,
and that trunk,
it comes out of the sea
floor and bifurcates,
it splits and then it keeps
splitting, keeps splitting.
But that bifurcation is
a signature of crinoids.
So if we just take a
look at the stalk here,
here are two examples of just
the stalk and just the hint
of a bifurcation.
Well, we have two images here.
One is from Earth
and one is from Mars.
Now, Jimmy, if you were to try
to guess which one is which,
what would you say?
>>CHURCH: Both are amazing.
And if I get it wrong, that's
going to be more amazing.
Now, I would say that the one
on the right is from Earth.
The image on the left
from Mars, how could that
happen naturally on Mars
with the planet without life?
>>DOBBS: So when I first
came across this image,
I'm like, I don't know what a
crinoid is, so I looked that up.
And then I'm like, well, I
need to vet this somehow.
So I said, let me see if I
can find a paleontologist
and ask him what he thought.
And I emailed this photo
to a paleontologist
who specializes
in crinoid fossils
at the University of Cincinnati.
And I said, hey, what
do you think of this?
And he says, this looks like
the fossil of either a sea
lily or a crinoid.
Then he asked me
where I got the image.
And I told him it
came from NASA,
it was photographed on Mars.
>>CHURCH: What was his reaction?
>>DOBBS: I never
heard back from him.
>>CHURCH: Of course not.
>>DOBBS: But that let me know
that a trained eye, someone
who specializes in
this stuff, even thinks
that that's a crinoid fossil.
It's good enough for me, why
are we not following up on that?
>>CHURCH: What part of
Mars was that photographed?
>>DOBBS: I don't know.
And unfortunately, we
can't go back to it
because NASA in an effort
to investigate further,
ground it down to nothing.
Three hours later after
that photo was taken,
they used a rock abrasion
tool to dig into it
to see if it contained any
carbon, which is an absolutely
ridiculous thing to do.
When you come across
a dinosaur skull,
you don't crack it
open with a hammer
to see if there's
any brains inside.
It's all fossilized.
There is no more
carbon in fossils.
Why did they grind it down?
It just seems like the
most idiotic thing to do.
>>CHURCH: We're going to be
looking at some more images
here.
But as a filmmaker and
I live in Hollywood,
I love the art of filmmaking,
I love the wider the screen
the better, and the more color
the better, but in editing
and everything else, but I do
look at film and I study it,
I love it.
When I look at the
millions of images of Mars,
and today they're more higher
def than ever before, you
can really break this
down and look at it,
but as somebody that's
looking at an image,
if I was out in the desert
and I needed to survive,
I'm going to scan and look for
something I need to walk to.
I need something
that isn't natural.
I need a structure,
I need something.
You see that all through the
images of Mars, don't you?
You can look off in
the distance and see
something that isn't natural.
It's all over the place
on Mars, isn't it?
>>DOBBS: Yes.
And thank God we have
these folks scattered
throughout the world, these
independent Mars researchers who
are just your average Joe, doing
nothing else in their spare time
but to sift through upon
thousands of images,
excuse me, finding quite
a number of anomalies.
>>CHURCH: What is
a trace fossil?
>>DOBBS: A trace fossil,
think of it this way.
Think of a dinosaur footprint.
It's not the dinosaur
skeleton itself,
but you know that 65 million
years ago a big old animal
stood right there and
made that footprint.
So what's interesting
is that, again,
getting back to
photographic evidence,
we do have photographic evidence
of trace fossils on Mars.
Not dinosaur
footprints, but Jimmy,
imagine what a worm
footprint might look like.
What do worms do?
They just sliver
through the soil.
But if you were to dig
up that piece of soil
and open it up and look inside,
you'd see these little burrows.
Little critters make
these little tracks,
these what they call
worm-like trace fossils.
And we do in fact see
trace fossils, thanks
to the work of Barry
DiGregorio, he's
an astrobiologist,
Gil Evans biographer,
but he also sifts through
thousands of these images
just looking for anomalies.
And he has uncovered
images of what
appeared to be trace fossils in
what was once a lake on Mars.
So is it any--
>>CHURCH: We have
some images here.
Take me through this.
>>DOBBS: Well, here you go.
Here's another comparison.
What we see here are two
images, one is on Earth
and one is on Mars.
Jimmy, we just see these
little squiggly lines.
If you had to take a guess,
which would you say is Earth
and which would you say is Mars?
>>CHURCH: They're
both from my backyard.
I think they both show organic
life, that's what I see.
>>DOBBS: Well, when
they talk about rovers
looking for signs of ancient
life, what is ancient life?
As we can see here, the
one on the left is Mars.
>>CHURCH: Oh.
>>DOBBS: The one on
the right is Earth.
So we see these
squiggly lines, which
is distinctly different from
the surrounding rock there.
Is this not exactly
what NASA is claiming
that they're looking for right
now, signs of ancient life?
What is ancient life?
Most likely fossilized.
There you go, boys.
It's right there.
So here's another
example, again, my friend
Barry DiGregorio.
We see these rocks
with these holes.
>>CHURCH: That's incredible.
>>DOBBS: This is a marine rock.
It was at the bottom of a
lake or maybe even an ocean.
And there are creatures
who bore into rocks
and make these
signature holes here.
Here on Earth we see it
and here we see it on Mars.
So is that not signs
of ancient life?
>>CHURCH: It's the
same image, isn't it?
>>DOBBS: Are we
kidding ourselves here?
Or it's just like,
don't believe your eyes?
>>CHURCH: Panspermia is one
of my favorite subjects.
And if I'm going to look
at an obvious situation
for panspermia, I
look at the asteroid
Bennu and what just
happened there.
And to have the
technology for us
to go out, land
on that asteroid,
scoop it up, bring it back,
crashed in the Utah desert
a couple of years ago, and
did the testing of that.
And what did we find?
We found the 20 amino
acids that make up
RNA in the vacuum of space
on a random asteroid.
We found the five proteins that
make up DNA from one soil scoop.
Well, if that asteroid crashed
into another planet with water
a few million years
later, I think
we would have
sophisticated life.
Well, panspermia answers
a lot of these questions.
Could it be the same
thing with Mars?
And could these
meteorites crash on Mars,
the same ones that crashed
here and brought life here?
>>DOBBS: Yes, it
turns out that there's
evidence that says Earth
and Mars have essentially
been swapping spit for millions,
if not billions of years.
We find Mars rocks come
to Earth all the time.
There's no reason why we should
expect Earth rocks aren't
doing the same.
Getting back to the dinosaurs
65 million years ago,
let's say a meteor comes
down and ejects material up
into the atmosphere.
Some of it's going to come
back down, but some of it's
going to be ejected so
far out and eventually
make its way to Mars.
Now, inside this rock
will be a lot of microbes,
and some of them will
survive that journey even
through atmospheric reentry.
So this panspermia
concept is well-understood
by astrobiologists today.
They love talking
about it, but they
don't seem to be familiar with
any of the evidence for it.
And this is surprising
to me, it is their field.
>>CHURCH: Like the Allan
Hills meteorite, for example?
>>DOBBS: Yes, this is the
most well-known example,
a rock that was discovered in
the '80s, 1984 in Antarctica,
took him 10 years
to do the analysis.
But ultimately it found
its way to the White House,
where Bill Clinton
himself had a--
>>CHURCH: Yes, he did.
>>DOBBS: --press conference on
the White House lawn on this
rock which appeared to show
a little critter inside,
and thus got the world
excited about the potential--
>>CHURCH: We have the clip.
>>DOBBS: Oh, great.
>>CHURCH: We have the clip
of Bill Clinton addressing
the country.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
- More than four billion
years ago, this piece of rock
was formed as a part of
the original crust of Mars.
After billions of years,
it broke from the surface
and began a 16
million year journey
through space that
would end here on Earth.
It arrived in a meteor
shower 13,000 years ago.
And in 1984, an
American scientist
on an annual US
government mission
to search for
meteors on Antarctica
picked it up and took
it to be studied.
Appropriately, it
was the first rock
to be picked up that
year, rock number 84001.
Today, rock 84001 speaks to
us across all those billions
of years and millions of miles.
It speaks of the
possibility of life.
If this discovery
is confirmed, it
will surely be one of the
most stunning insights
into our universe that
science has ever uncovered.
Its implications are as
far-reaching and awe-inspiring
as can be imagined.
Even as it promises answers to
some of our oldest questions,
it poses still others
even more fundamental.
We will continue
to listen closely
to what it has to say as we
continue the search for answers
and for knowledge that
is as old as humanity
itself, but essential
to our people's future.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>CHURCH: Absolutely
fascinating.
And you know what my
takeaway from that
is, the timescales that
we're talking about,
4 billion years ago and
3 billion years ago.
And how long has
it taken us, you
and I to sit here and
have this conversation?
How many billions of
years have passed?
That part is fine, but we
also can destroy ourselves
in a nuclear war.
And in 1976, xenon-129, and
Brandenburg and my conversations
with him about this discovery.
Xenon-129 only occurs when?
>>DOBBS: That's a
very good question.
So yes, in 1976, Viking mission
was observing the atmosphere
of Mars, and it
started coming up
with some really odd
mixtures of gases.
And one of these particular
isotopes that it found
was an isotope of this often
misunderstood or really not
well-known gas called xenon.
It sounds made up, but it's not.
And it's on the periodic table.
And one of its isotopes was
found in the atmosphere of Mars,
which if you know what
you're looking at,
you might scratch
your head over this.
Now what's interesting this
particular isotope, xenon-129,
is that, well, as Dr.
Brandenburg, the person who
was responsible for doing
all of this research
and presenting all of
this data, actually, he's
analyzing the data that
was collected by NASA.
NASA collects all
this data, they
don't necessarily analyze
and add any commentary to it.
But there's only
two ways you can
create this particular
isotope of xenon.
One is through supernova.
Now let's just say
there was a supernova
in the galactic neighborhood.
Hypothetically, if it didn't
blow up our solar system,
it would have placed
xenon-129 everywhere else
in our solar system,
but we don't see that.
We see a spike of
this only on Mars.
So you can rule out the
supernova explanation
right then and there.
You can also rule out any
other natural nuclear reactions
because not all nuclear
reactions are created equal.
We won't go into the details.
And that leaves you with
only one alternative,
which is that the xenon-129 that
we see in the atmosphere of Mars
was not put there naturally.
It was an artificial process.
The only other process
that creates this
is the physics that happens in
a thermonuclear weapon, which
right then and there
stopped me in my tracks
when I first heard about this.
>>CHURCH: Nuclear war, a nuclear
explosion, a nuclear bomb.
Would that suggest to you that
a civilization rose on Mars,
advanced to having
nuclear technology
and wiped themselves out?
Or possibly that Mars
maybe was attacked
by another extraterrestrial
race for whatever reason?
We only have two
choices here, don't we?
>>DOBBS: It's a good question.
What we can say is
that the location
of the radioactive hotspots
on the surface of Mars
indicate that there are
no craters just like--
>>CHURCH: When you say hotspots,
are you saying locations on Mars
where this was--
>>DOBBS: Think Chernobyl, you
go there it's radioactive.
You need a suit to go there,
that's a radioactive hotspot.
We see the same radioactive
hotspots on Mars.
And that was a nuclear
power plant meltdown.
But these particular
radioactive hotspots
have different characteristics.
But there are no craters
in these locations,
just like there are
no craters in Japan
at Hiroshima or Nagasaki.
What happened there during
World War II were airbursts.
It's to maximize the radiation
fallout, the destruction.
So who can say as to who
might have done this?
Did they do this to themselves?
Did somebody else do it to them?
I don't know, but it's awfully
sinister considering the fact
that the evidence suggests
that these two things were
responsible for destroying
the atmosphere of this planet.
One of the problems that was
presented in Christopher Nolan's
movie, Oppenheimer, before they
did the first Trinity test,
you see Cillian Murphy as
Oppenheimer, Matt Damon,
and they're having
this discussion,
what are the
chances this test is
going to ignite the
atmosphere of Earth
and destroy all life
here on this planet?
And Cillian Murphy, as
Oppenheimer responds,
there is a near zero chance.
They weren't sure.
Now fortunately, we didn't
kill everything here on Earth,
but that's because the Trinity
test didn't have enough power.
But the power that
Dr. Brandenburg
has shown that destroyed
this atmosphere of Mars
was 10 to 100
times more powerful
than the impact that is credited
for killing the dinosaurs here
on Earth.
That's strong.
>>CHURCH: So Brian,
we have the images
of Gary Leggiere
and the pyramids.
What are we looking at?
>>DOBBS: Gary lives in Colorado.
He has found dozens
of these structures.
These are about 3/4 of a mile
long, I call them the triangles.
What natural
process creates what
appeared to be these pyramidal
mounds with a line underneath?
I don't see that as being water
erosion or even wind erosion.
These things are huge.
I just don't understand
what would cause
these things to be formed.
So Gary is one of these
independent Mars researchers
and he's doing this
in his spare time
and really deserves
a lot of credit
for finding these
interesting structures.
>>CHURCH: Amazing.
But those craters--
>>DOBBS: And here's
another one he found.
>>CHURCH: --they look huge.
>>DOBBS: So here, do
volcanoes look like that?
We see it next to a crater,
yes, a crater is huge.
And here's something
that's probably
10 times the size of
the pyramid in Egypt,
with obvious signs of sides
and geometry and symmetry.
Why are we not taking
a closer look at that?
>>CHURCH: 90-degree angles.
>>DOBBS: And look at this.
>>CHURCH: What is that?
>>DOBBS: To me, that
looks like a column
buried into the side of a hill.
It's smooth, it's
circular on the end,
amidst a rugged
landscape surrounding it.
>>CHURCH: I just got
back from Puma Punku,
and you see that everywhere.
You see columns half buried in
the dirt, you trip over them.
I have to tell you, that image
looks like it's from Puma Punku.
>>DOBBS: Again, here's
another example.
Jean Ward from South
Africa discovered
this, Teotihuacan in Mexico.
If you cover that with
a little bit of dirt,
would it not look like
something like that
that we find there on Mars?
Well, anyway, Jean Ward
from South Africa, I
have to mention his name too.
He's doing outstanding work.
And this independent
Mars researcher community
has been marginalized.
That's the problem.
NASA releases the photos, the
independent researcher community
sifts through them, makes the
discovery, and publishes saying,
hey look, there's
something strange here
and we need to take
a closer look at it.
Because NASA should be doing
that work, but they're not.
>>CHURCH: Is Earth ready
for this information
that Mars had an
ancient civilization?
They came and went.
It could indicate our
future here too, as well.
And maybe we should be
aware of the possibility
of our own demise.
Could that really change
things here on Earth?
Are we ready for
something like that?
>>DOBBS: Some people are,
but some people aren't.
I mean, there's a lot of
information about Mars.
There's a story about Mars,
starting with the microbes
and then leading up to the
possibility of intelligent life
in the past that people do
need to understand because it's
one of the greatest
stories that I think
has yet to really been told.
When I was sitting around
trying to figure out
what I'm going to do with all
the stuff that I'm learning,
that's why I'm now becoming
a public messenger on this
because I find it so
incredibly fascinating,
and I think more people
need to know about it,
but the implications
are terrifying.
But I think if we can show that
Mars was a lot more like Earth,
then they might be a
little bit more open to it
from an emotional perspective.
>>CHURCH: Is it possible
that we are Martians?
>>DOBBS: Why not?
Mars was like Earth
in the distant past,
at a time when Earth
wasn't even like Earth.
Earth was not habitable.
Mars was habitable before.
So if it gave rise to
intelligent life that
created artifacts, tools,
signs of civilization,
and by extension structures
that we can see from space
and maybe developed a space
program, it's plausible.
And we see evidence that there
was an intelligent civilization
there before, based on the
orbiter photographs which
have photographed what
arguably look like pyramids.
>>CHURCH: Fascinating
conversation, Brian.
Where can everybody
follow your work?
>>DOBBS: So if you'd
like to know more
about my work and
the Mars community,
I've got a film coming out.
You can find out more
on blueplanetred.net.
You can find me on Twitter
and YouTube @BrianCoryDobbs.
>>CHURCH: I look forward
to our next conversation
right here on the show.
I'm your host, Jimmy Church,
sitting in for George Noory
on Beyond Belief.
We'll see you next time.
[THEME MUSIC]